[Docs]: Update `State` section (#1029)
0xPolygonMiden/miden-base: docs/architecture/state.md

# State

## What is the purpose of state?

Miden enables secure, private, and scalable transaction execution. By employing a concurrent state model with local execution and proving, Miden achieves three primary objectives: preserving privacy, supporting parallel transactions, and minimizing on-chain data storage (state bloat).

Miden’s state model focuses on:

> - **Privacy Preservation:**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Privacy:**  
```

Maybe just privacy?

>   By using notes and nullifiers, Miden ensures that value transfers remain confidential. Zero-knowledge proofs allow users to prove correctness without revealing sensitive information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Using zero-knowledge and separating note states into two databases, notes and nullifiers, there can be private asset transfers.
```

Author: I would keep the current wording.

> - **Flexible Data Storage:**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Flexible data storage:**  
```

  Users can store data privately on their own devices or within the network. This approach reduces reliance on the network for data availability, helps maintain user sovereignty, and minimizes unnecessary on-chain storage.

> - **Parallelizable Execution:**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Concurrency:**  
```

Better?

>   Multiple transactions can be processed concurrently by distinct actors which improves throughput and efficiency.

Reviewer 2: I would change the order here to be: concurrency, storage, privacy.

> Miden’s state model supports a private, secure, and high-throughput environment while also addressing the challenges of state bloat commonly associated with continuously growing blockchain states.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is very similar to the intro sentence on line 5 above. I'd probably combine them together.

## What is state?

> The state of the Miden rollup describes the current condition of all accounts and notes in the protocol; i.e., the current reality.

Reviewer 2: Probably not for this PR, but I think we should come up with a better wording then just "state". Maybe we should say "ledger state", "blockchain state" or something like that.

## State model components

The Miden node maintains three databases to describe state:

1. Accounts
2. Notes
3. Nullifiers

![Architecture core concepts](../img/architecture/state/state.png)

### Account database

> The accounts database stores the latest account states for public accounts or state commitments for private accounts.

Reviewer 2: I think it may be good to add some more detail here. For example, account DB has 2 purposes: (1) track state commitments of all accounts in an authenticated data structure (i.e., the SMT), (2) store all account data for public accounts. This would also make the graphic below a bit easier to understand.

Reviewer: Isn't the sentence above saying exactly that? The DB stores commitments for private accounts and states for the public accounts? Maybe we should clarify that a bit more or write 2 sentences about it. 

Can we describe the features of the authenticated data structure (i.e. data integrity) without mentioning the SMT? To me the SMT again is an implementation detail whereas the protocol should describe what the rules and features are.

Reviewer 2: > Isn't the sentence above saying exactly that? The DB stores commitments for private accounts and states for the public accounts? Maybe we should clarify that a bit more or write 2 sentences about it.

We store state commitments for all accounts in an authenticated data structure (not just private accounts). I would describe this a bit more explicitly so that readers don't need to infer such details.

> Can we describe the features of the authenticated data structure (i.e. data integrity) without mentioning the SMT? To me the SMT again is an implementation detail whereas the protocol should describe what the rules and features are.

I actually don't mind mentioning the SMT - it is a core part of the protocol. But we don't have to go into specific details of how we've implemented the SMT (there are many different ways to do this and this may change over time).

![Architecture core concepts](../img/architecture/state/account-db.png)

As described in the [accounts section](accounts.md), there are two types of accounts:

- **Public accounts:** where all account data is stored on-chain.
- **Private accounts:** where only the hash of the account is stored on-chain.

Private accounts significantly reduce storage overhead. A private account contributes only $40$ bytes to the global state ($8$ bytes for the account ID + $32$ bytes for the account hash). For example, 1 billion private accounts take up only $40$ GB of state.

> The storage contribution of a public account depends on the amount of data it stores.

Author: I would not go too deep into details.

> **Warning**
> - In Miden, when the user is the custodian of their account state (in the case of a private account), losing this state amounts to losing their funds, similar to losing a private key.

> ### Notes database

Reviewer: Is it Note database or Note**s** database?

Private accounts significantly reduce storage overhead. A private account contributes only $40$ bytes to the global state ($8$ bytes for the account ID + $32$ bytes for the account hash). For example, 1 billion private accounts take up only $40$ GB of state.

The storage contribution of a public account depends on the amount of data it stores.

> **Warning**
>  Losing the state of a private account means loss of funds in a similar manner as a loss of a private key - as the user won't be able to execute transactions. This problem can be mitigated by storing encrypted account state in the cloud or backing it up somewhere else. Unlike storing private keys in the cloud, this does not compromise privacy or account security.
>
>  In the future we hope to enable encrypted accounts where the account data is stored on-chain but in an encrypted format. This is especially interesting for shared accounts like advanced multi-sig wallets.
> - In Miden, when the user is the custodian of their account state (in the case of a private account), losing this state amounts to losing their funds, similar to losing a private key.

### Note database

> Notes are recorded in an append-only accumulator, a [Merkle Mountain Range](https://github.com/opentimestamps/opentimestamps-server/blob/master/doc/merkle-mountain-range.md). Each leaf is a block header which contains the commitment to all notes created in that block. The commitment is a Sparse Merkle Tree of all the notes in a block. The size of the Merkle Mountain Range grows logarithmically with the number of items in it.

Reviewer 2: I would mention the append-only accumulator here - it is a pretty important architectural detail (though the description here is not correct - see previous comment).

> ![Architecture core concepts](../img/architecture/state/note-db.png)

Reviewer 2: This picture is outdated: we don't actually have a separate notes MMR. Instead, we have the blockchain MMR where every leaf is a block header. Then, each block header contains a commitment to the notes created in that block.

> ### Nullifier database

Author: Good point, I believe that this should be added to the `note` page.

> Nullifiers map one-to-one to existing notes, tracking whether a note has been consumed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every note has a nullifier [LINK TO NOTE SECTION]. The note has been consumed if the nullifier is recorded in the database. 
```

Simpler wording?

Reviewer: Maybe also add that the nullifier db prevents double spending. Notes can only be consumed once.

Author: Reworded and added.

> To prove that a note has not been consumed, the operator must provide a Merkle path to the corresponding node and show that the node’s value is `0`. Since nullifiers are $32$ bytes each, the Sparse Merkle Tree height must be sufficient to represent all possible nullifiers. Operators must maintain the entire nullifier set to compute the new tree root after inserting new nullifiers.

Reviewer 2: One thing that maybe we should mention explicitly: for each nullifier we also record the block in which it was created. This way "unconsumed" nullifiers have block 0, but all consumed nullifiers have a non-zero block.

To prove that a note has not been consumed, the operator must provide a Merkle path to the corresponding node and show that the node’s value is `0`. Since nullifiers are $32$ bytes each, the Sparse Merkle Tree height must be sufficient to represent all possible nullifiers. Operators must maintain the entire nullifier set to compute the new tree root after inserting new nullifiers.

Using a Merkle Mountain Range (append-only accumulator) is important for two reasons:
> **Note**
> - Nullifiers in Miden break linkability between privately stored notes and their consumption details. To know the [note’s nullifier](notes.md#note-nullifier-ensuring-private-consumption), one must know the note’s data.

1. Membership witnesses (that a note exists in the database) against such an accumulator needs to be updated very infrequently.
2. Old membership witnesses can be extended to a new accumulator value, but this extension does not need to be done by the original witness holder.
![Architecture core concepts](../img/architecture/state/nullifier-db.png)

> Both of these properties are needed for supporting local transactions using client-side proofs and privacy. In an append-only data structure, witness data does not become stale when the data structure is updated. That means users can generate valid proofs even if they don’t have the latest state of this database; so there is no need to query the operator on a constantly changing state.

Reviewer 2: This is a pretty important architectural detail - I would not remove this.

> ### Public shared state

Reviewer: This is super important. A lot of ppl ask about it

Author: What is super important?

> ### Public shared state

Reviewer 2: I like the idea of this section but I think it should be a part of a bigger section the describes how different users work with the state. Specifically, we could come up with different types of state:

1. Self-custodied state - state managed by a single user.
2. Federated state - state managed by a small number of users (e.g., under 100).
3. Network-managed state - state managed by the network itself (this would be the "public shared state").
4. Hybrids between the above (this could be a really cool thing).

Would be good to describe how these work and what are the tradeoffs between them.

> To handle public shared state in Miden (e.g., AAVE, Uniswap), users and developers can replicate the following model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, smart contracts and most applications (e.g., AAVE, Uniswap) need public shared state. There is also public shared state on Miden. Let's look at the following example:
```

>    A Miden node executes `tx3` against the shared account, consuming **notes 1 & 2** and producing **notes 3 & 4**. This merges independent contributions into a unified state update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The Miden node executes `tx3` against the shared account, consuming **notes 1 & 2** and producing **notes 3 & 4**. `tx3` is a network transaction and cannot be executed client-side. It merges independent contributions into a unified state update.
```

> Operators do not need to know the entire state to verify or produce new blocks. Rather than storing the full state data with operators, users keep their data locally, and the rollup stores only commitments to that data. While some contracts must remain publicly visible, this approach minimizes state bloat and preserves privacy, since operators and other users only see hashes of user data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Miden nodes do not need to know the entire state to verify or produce new blocks. Rather than storing the full state data with the nodes, users keep their data locally, and the rollup stores only commitments to that data. While some contracts must remain publicly visible, this approach minimizes state bloat and preserves privacy, since nodes and other users only see hashes of user data.
```
